AIDA2 MANUAL CONTENTS CONTENTS CONTENTS Chapter 1 INtrODUCtION tO FreeDIVING 1 1.1 Freediving is... 2 1.2 AIDA International 6 Chapter 2 INtrODUCtION tO aIDa2 9 2.1 AIDA Instructor 10 Chapter 3 FreeDIVe BreathING CYCLe 15 3.1 Relaxation Phase 18 3.2 One Full Breath 19 3.3 Breath Hold 22 3.4 Recovery breathing 26 Chapter 4 BaSIC phYSIOLOGY OF FreeDIVING 28 4.1 The Respiratory System 28 4.2 The Circulatory System 29 4.3 The Mechanics of Breathing 30 4.4 The Regulation of Breathing 31 4.5 Hyperventilation 36 4.6 Safely prolong Dives 38 Chapter 5 eQUaLISatION 40 5.2 Air Spaces 42 5.3 Equalisation Technique 43 5.4 Facilitate Equalisation 45 Chapter 6 FreeDIVe teChNIQUe 47 6.1 Duck dive 48 6.2 Finning technique 50 6.3 The Descent 51 6.4 The Turn 52 6.5 The Ascent 53 6.6 Surface and Recovery 54 Chapter 7 SaFetY IN FreeDIVING 56 7.1 The Buddy System 56 7.2 Static Buddying 58

AIDA2 MANUAL CONTENTS 7.3 Signs of a freediver in need of help 61 7.4 Loss of Motor Control (LMC) 63 7.5 Blackout (BO) 64 7.6 Rescue a Freediver 67 7.7 Risk Reduction 70 7.8 Freediving and Scuba 73 Chapter 8 eQUIpMeNt FOr FreeDIVING 75 8.1 Mask 76 8.2 Fins 78 8.3 Snorkel 80 8.4 Weight belt 82 8.5 Wetsuit 83 8.6 Lanyard 85 8.7 Freedive Buoy 87 Chapter 9 FreeDIVING DISCIpLINeS 90 9.1 Static Apnea (STA) 91 9.2 Dynamic Apnea (DYN, DNF) 92 9.3 Free Immersion (FIM) 94 9.4 Constant Weight (CWT, CNF) 95 9.5 Variable Weight (VWT) 97 9.6 No Limits (NLT) 98 Chapter 10 FreeDIVer CODe OF CONDUCt 100 appeNDIX a KNOWLeDGe reVIeW 101 CreDItS 108

CHAPTER 01 INTRODUCTION TO FREEDIVING Millions of people around the world enjoy snorkelling. Many of them will also take a big breath and dive down for a few brief moments to have a closer look at a colourful coral, a shy turtle – or just for the fun of it. That is where freediving begins. If you read this manual it is very likely that you have taken that big breath already many times before. In fact, freediving is a very common activity and by far more than an extreme sport as it is often depicted in the media. Freediving can be learned 1

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 01 New born babies enjoy being under water simply for the fun of it. Holding our breath and allowing the water to carry us seems to be part of human nature. Learning to freedive as adults is a way to re-discover these forgotten abilities. Your first lessons in freediving are mostly about letting go of unneeded physical and mental activity in order to allow yourself to relax. This might take time, but it will come. “Relaxation” is probably the most important word in freediving. Recreational and Extreme Freediving The AIDA Education Program teaches recreational freediving. Competitions and record attempts are part of extreme freediving. Somewhere in between recreational and extreme freediving is a blurry line that separates the two. Looking for personal limits and taking a peek beyond them is probably part of human nature. This is exactly what you do when staying under water just a little bit longer than you would without a basic knowledge of freediving – you are exploring your own self. Freediving is very much about discovering new sensations by learning and developing new capabilities. Going one step beyond and shifting your momentary boundaries in a relaxed, comfortable manner – this is recreational freediving. Going for a world record, developing an even faster sled for deep diving – this means not only going beyond your personal boundaries, but also pushing the known limits of human capacity. Freediving in these dimensions requires total devotion to the sport and a deep commitment to the lifestyle of an athlete. This includes a strict training schedule, a rigorous diet, healthy sleeping patterns and so forth. In short, being a freedive athlete will outline your whole life. This is categorized as extreme freediving. 1.1 Freediving is... Freediving = Apnea In certain countries such as Spain, France, Italy, or others, freediving is also referred to as “apnea”. It is derived from the Greek word “apnoia” and literally translated stands for “without breathing”. Technically, freediving starts when you hold your breath in water. The importance of this simple definition cannot be overstated. All safety procedures that you will learn in the AIDA Education System become valid in the very moment a person is doing a breath hold in water. Obviously , 2

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 01 Fun freediver exploring a reef this is the case in open water, but it is equally important to keep this in mind when holding your breath in swimming pools, or even in your bathtub. The primary directive in is thus: Always freedive with a qualified buddy In your AIDA Education you will learn how this simple rule, along with a few more, make freediving a very safe and enjoyable experience. A diverse activity Freediving begins when you hold your breath in water. This encompasses a great variety of activities and explains the existence of the large range of specialities. Underwater hunting or spearfishing is just as much freediving as is underwater rugby or underwater hockey. The latter two are even getting played in leagues. Indeed, very different sports, but after all, all of them belong to the freedive family. All of these activities or sports have one point in common: Peaceful silence under water. No matter if you are hunting, or going for a world record in deep freediving, or if you take your camera down to a few meters; the way to approach freediving is to let go, becoming absolutely silent and focused on the moment. 3

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 01 As freedivers we become one with the underwater world. It is the most natural way of being under water on a breath hold – just like any other mammal that lives in water. If we move gracefully and steadily and do not exhale bubbles, underwater life is much less scared of us. Curious fish will approach us. We do not need to “chase”, we only need to wait to be approached. Whatever your choice of freediving is, you can be assured to learn a great deal about yourself. Freediving confronts us with one of our deepest fears: The fear of drowning. In your AIDA Course you will learn why this will not happen. But fear is unlikely to diminish just through knowledge. Since the time we were babies, the “urge to breathe” has been drilled into us as a command of our body. We have learned to obey immediately, or damage will be done, as we assume. In freediving you learn that the “urge to breathe” is not hard wired – it is information about what is happening in your mind and your body. You will learn to deal with that information in a new and safe way. This takes some time and repetition. Soon you will get to the point where you would usually want to breathe. But you purposely decide not to, even if it is just for another few moments. This is where the freediving journey begins. Freediving can be done literally everywhere where you can find water: It certainly is a beautiful experience to visit warm and clear tropical waters to go down on a breath hold, but just as many apneists dive and train regularly in lakes, pools or even rivers. A way of life Maybe it is hardly possibly to explain the fascination of freediving to someone who has never tried before. Too often freedivers are talked down as thrill seekers or daredevils by people who have never experienced a single breath hold dive. Without doubt, it is exhilarating for freedivers to be amongst people who do not need an explanation for the inexplicable. That is why freedivers like to mingle with other freedivers – in real life as much as on the web – to exchange their experiences, tips and videos. This way a worldwide freedive community has established. Nowadays you can find freedive buddies and schools almost anywhere you go. The human body adapts to freediving. The more you freedive, the greater this adaptation and the more enjoyable freediving becomes. Even when you are not in the water you can perform a great variety of exercises and activities to support these adaptations. It may be by starting a regular - or change your existing - yoga 4

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 01 practice, change of diet or dry apnea exercises. Soon you may also change your travelling plans to be in the water as often as possible. To some of us, freediving is a fun activity to do on holiday, for others however, it is a way of life. A social activity Freediving always happens in a group of at least two people – the buddy team. You will discover that freediving connects you with your buddy in a very intense way. Through the trust you have to build up and responsibility to watch each other’s back, many friendships have been formed. Whatever it is you see in freediving, through the AIDA Education Program you will quickly discover how freediving is enjoyable and – if you want it to be – a school for life. 1.2 aIDa International 5

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 01 The acronym “AIDA” Established in 1992, AIDA stands for the French term “Association Internationale pour le Développement de l’Apnée”, the international association for apnea development. The organisation was initially French and it is now based in Zürich/Switzerland. AIDA is committed to paperless administration as much as legally possible. The organisation thus uses the website www.aidainternational.org as its major means of communication. Non-profit organization AIDA is a non-profit organisation. In their day-job, most people working for AIDA are specialists in their fields of trade. For example, the AIDA Medical Commission consists of leading Emergency Room specialists, trauma experts and experienced diving doctors. Their day job keeps them up to date in their respective topics, which in turn allows AIDA to be at the forefront of latest science and experience. The national AIDA organizations largely rely on volunteer work to organise meetings, courses and competitions. Apart from experienced instructors or judges, these events always ask for a lot of manpower in administration, printing, driving around, helping hands here and there and good souls. Volunteering in an AIDA event is 6

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 01 great fun and a perfect way for you to get to know your local freedive community! You can find your national AIDA organization through the official AIDA website. Freediving education program The goal of the AIDA Education Program is to share the knowledge and skills to enjoy freediving in a safe and responsible way. It caters for absolute beginners as much as for advanced freedivers and takes you through a comprehensive, professional qualification structure all the way up to AIDA Instructor level. Freediving has probably been around since the dawn of mankind. Just look at the phenomenal Japanese pearl diving Amas, the Greek sponge collectors or the Filipino, 7

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 01 Indonesian or Malaysian water tribes with their spectacular underwater hunting capabilities. Compared to that, recreational and competitive freediving as we know it today is still a very young phenomenon. Because of that, the learning curve in modern freediving is still steep. Techniques get introduced, refined, adapted, and replaced all the time. The AIDA Education Program is kept on top of this rapid development by regular revision and adaptation to the latest research in order to remain the standard of worldwide freediving Education since its inception in 1992. Freediving safety standards Best practice in safety standards is obviously the most important part of AIDA Freedive Education. Competition rules and education programs always follow the latest safety standards, which cannot be compromised. It is well possible that you will have encounters with freedivers, spear fishers or snorkelers that enjoy their freediving in a completely different way from what you are taught by your AIDA Instructor. Different knowledge and opinions of these - sometimes very experienced - water(wo)men does not qualify them as incapable, but it shows how quickly modern freediving still evolves! Freediving competitions & world records Last but not least, AIDA oversees all official freediving competitions as well as national and international records. Trained and certified AIDA Judges implement and supervise the application of all valid safety standards on various levels – from a small local competition up to the yearly AIDA World Championships. Chapter 01 Knowledge Review What is the primary directive in freediving? How to make contact with your local freedive community? 8

CHAPTER 02 INTRODUCTION TO AIDA2 The goal of the AIDA2 Freediver Course is to allow you to gain a good understanding of freediving. From the duck dive, over finning technique to equalisation – you will learn all basic skills, step by step. Many freediving novices are concerned about numbers, such as minutes of breath hold or depth of a dive in order to become a certified freediver. In fact, the numbers show that you have mastered the basic skills and thus meters and seconds are not the primary concern. Prerequisites To enroll in an AIDA2 Course you must be able to swim at least 200m non-stops without fins and at least 300m non-stops with mask, fins and snorkel. The AIDA2 Course is designed for beginners with no previous experience in freediving. It is not required having completed the AIDA1 Course. 9

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 02 Not only for divers Freediving is for everyone and there is no specific diving background needed. All other forms of diving (scuba, technical, etc.) mainly focus on how to handle your dive equipment in a safe and efficient way. In freediving the primary skills you learn is how to handle yourself, and then how to deal with gear. The greatest advantage for beginner freedivers is to feel comfortable in water, to allow it to carry you, and to be able to “let go”. Being comfortable in water is of course related to how much time you already spent in water, be it as a scuba diver, a surfer or a swimmer – the more, the better. Be a safe Freediver Freediving is a very safe, enjoyable and very common activity in water. Still, it often is depicted as an extreme sport, meant for only a daring few. This is how freediving is often portrayed in media and results in a huge gap in perception. Freediving is in fact very safe if – and that is a very important “if” - you stick to a few basic but crucial rules. The most important ones are: • Always freedive with a buddy • Relax before you hold your breath • Be correctly weighted To properly learn and apply these rules is the main goal of the AIDA2 Course. Higher- level follow-up courses will then build up on these basic techniques to take you deeper into water, deeper into the experience of yourself, one step at the time. 2.1 aIDa Instructor Diverse backgrounds of freedive instructors For most AIDA Instructors, teaching freediving is not what they do for life, but what they live for. They offer training on a club basis, mostly in pools, sometimes in lakes or the sea – freediving is so diverse that you can find an AIDA Instructor almost everywhere on the planet. Only a few instructors actually make their living from 10

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 02 Introduction to freediving during a pool session. teaching and thus, live and work in a place where open water freediving is possible on a daily basis. Part of AIDA Instructor Training is to write a paper about freediving. The candidates are asked to make best use of their personal or professional background and add to the already existing body of knowledge. A physiotherapist for example may add specific valuable techniques and information to his/her teaching, and so can an engineer in hydrodynamics. Hence, it is a great advantage that AIDA Freedive Instructors come from very diverse backgrounds and often stay in their daily trades. The relationship between teacher and student always depends on the personalities involved. A certain AIDA Instructor might be perfect for you in his/her competitive thinking and approach, while the same instructor can be daunting to others. One student prefers to be instructed “hands on” on how to use muscles correctly, while another one does not like to be touched at all. Instructors are not machines, but professionally trained individuals with a variety of characters and backgrounds. An open communication between the instructor and the students is key to a pleasant 11

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 02 experience on every level of freediving, but especially in the beginning when you take your first steps into liquid. Do not be ashamed – tell your instructor about your fears and let him know about your anxiety or how exited you are. It is perfectly fine to be a little bit on the edge, but not over it. Your instructor can handle it and will take care of you. Standardised education Since its inception in 1992, AIDA developed a comprehensive set of standards and guidelines how to teach freediving. The AIDA Education System is growing and constantly evolving due to over twenty years of teaching experience, competition results and record surveillance, combined with the latest research in the field of water related science. The AIDA Education System provides a comprehensible framework for teaching freediving in a safe way. This framework allows and asks of every AIDA Instructor to add (but not omit) information, techniques and teachings, and make best use of his/ her personal background and experience. The AIDA Education System gets reviewed and updated regularly. Athlete ≠ Instructor While the Instructor’s performance and experience as an athlete can be a plus, the best athlete is not self-evidently the best coach or instructor. Encountering obstacles in one’s own education and training helps the AIDA Instructor later to understand students’ needs and problems. The AIDA Education System is a framework that defines sets of skills, which have to be taught in every AIDA Freediving course. To some extent it is then up to the AIDA Instructor, how to teach you these skills. A competitive and directive instructor will probably be a very good teacher for you if your desire to become an athlete and to train on a full year basis. If you are more interested in breath-hold photography, you might want to look out for an instructor who does exactly that, and so on. All AIDA Instructors will teach you the same basic knowledge and skills that are defined in the AIDA Education System – and what they will add to that, what you will learn beyond the written word, that is up to you and your instructor of your choice. 12

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 02 Multiple instructors possible You can start any AIDA Course with one instructor and finish it later with another. The only constraint is that you have to continue your education within one year. It is also quite common that several instructors share the teaching during one course. Registration with AIDA / EOS Your instructor handles your registration with AIDA International and you will receive an automatically generated message to the email-address you have supplied to your instructor. This message contains a link to EOS, the AIDA Education Online System, in which you mention some personal data, including your postal address. Please check if you have received an email from EOS right after you handed in your details to your instructor. It is well possible that you will have to also check your spam- folders, as automatically created messages tend to end up there. It is important that you provide accurate and up-to-date information, also by logging in to your EOS- account anytime later in case you need to change some details. 13

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 02 Paperwork Before starting your AIDA Course you will need to provide some important paperwork to your instructor. This way AIDA makes sure that you are fit for and aware of the risks of freediving. Medical statement The AIDA Medical Statement states potential reasons for not making it possible for you to freedive. It is similar to the list of questions used in scuba diving. All questions ticked NO means you are set to start your freedive course. Any answer ticked YES means you will have to provide written medical clearance by a qualified doctor. For this, ask your doctor to use the designated part of the form. Be honest about your medical condition and mention previous minor surgeries or mild cases of asthma. In case you are embarking to a remote island for doing your AIDA Course, please make sure that you are in possession of any needed paperwork BEFORE you leave your home destination. The medical statement must be filled in, signed and handed in to your AIDA Instructor at the beginning of the course. Liability release (where applicable) In many countries you will have to hand in a signed AIDA Liability Release prior to any in-water activity. This form is to emphasise that freediving is an absolutely safe activity as long as you follow the rules indicated and taught by your instructors. AIDA Courses have an impeccable safety record in more than 20 years of teaching, and we would like to keep it that way. This waiver says that you have understood that you are the most important part of freediving safety. Chapter 02 Knowledge Review When you start a course with one instructor, you have to complete it with the same instructor? True or False. Explain. 14

CHAPTER 03 FREEDIVE BREATHING CYCLE Here is an important fact about breathing in freediving: It is overrated! There is no magic breathing technique that will give you a safe breath-hold of several minutes. The word “safe” is a very important one in this context. The still young history of freediving is overflowing with discoveries and teachings of spectacular breathing patterns, but experience and modern science shows that they all have one thing in common: They are unsafe for beginners. In this chapter you will learn how to achieve great results in the safest way. The key to a long breath hold can be summarised in one word: relaxation. 15

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 03 Oxygen (O ) saturation 2 At any given time of resting your blood is fully saturated with Oxygen. You can easily prove this to yourself by putting an Oximeter (device to monitor level of oxygen in your blood) on a finger. The reading for a healthy person is always between 96% and 99%, which is the achievable maximum. If your reading is not within these limits, it is either because you are exerted or you have a specific health condition. Both are indicators that you should not freedive or even hold your breath at this moment. Being fully saturated with Oxygen at any given time leads us to a striking conclusion: The preparation for holding your breath has nothing to do with “oxygenating the body”! Instead, the last phase before a breath hold is about physical and mental relaxation and focus. The more relaxed you are physically and mentally, the less Oxygen you are using. This is what enables you to hold your breath safely for an extended time. The breath hold cycle Every breath hold is a cycle of four phases: 1. Relaxation Phase 2. One Full Breath 3. Breath-Hold 4. Recovery Breathing These four phases will be explained step-by-step in this chapter. You can try out everything as you read, and then go into your first full breath hold cycle. Feel free to explore in the dry while lying down on your bed or on a yoga mat. As soon as you feel like holding your breath in water, the first and most important safety rule of freediving applies: Always freedive with a buddy. A lifeguard at the other end of the pool is not good enough. A person qualified to perform freediver rescue techniques needs to watch over you at all times! Belly vs. chest breathing We differentiate between two ways of breathing: The more common way of breathing is happening in the upper part of the chest and is consequently called chest breathing. The more unknown other part of breathing is happening below your chest and expands your belly on every inhalation. It is thus also called belly breathing. 16

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 03 Awareness exercise for belly breathing Awareness Exercise: Sit upright or lay down on your back. Put your right hand on your belly and place your left hand on your chest. Relax for a few minutes and follow the air that you inhale all the way to your belly. Feel how your right hand moves slightly in and out, while your left hand is not moving at all. This is belly breathing. It is important to know that you can apply belly breathing at any time, most likely you do it unconsciously while you are sleeping, and for sure you did it in your very early days: Babies can only breathe into their bellies. Their muscles have not yet developed to be able to breathe also in the upper part of the torso. When you read “belly breathing” keep one of these pictures in your mind, either the happy baby with the round, soft belly, or imagine yourself sleeping peacefully. In advanced freediving you will learn spectacular exercises to enhance the functionality of your breathing muscles. It is important to note that these exercises are only intended for your dry training, but should not be applied directly before diving. 17

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 03 3.1 relaxation phase The relaxation phase is the time before your breath hold. The goal of this phase is to become completely relaxed, physically as much as mentally. Being physically relaxed means to let go of any unneeded muscle tension, while mental relaxation implies to be focused on the task at hand, to be in the here and now. Thinking uses Oxygen, so being focused also means to keep the mind from wandering. In other words, you are preparing for a breath hold by doing less and less, until you do nothing at all anymore. As your physical and mental relaxation gets deeper and deeper, you will notice that also your breathing gets calmer. The more relaxed you become, the less air you need. Your body will always breathe the exact right amount of air in and out according to the current state of activity. There is no need to interfere with that perfectly balanced mechanism. All of a sudden it becomes easy not to breathe for a moment. Belly breathing Apply belly breathing at all times during the relaxation phase. Relaxation exercise It sounds simple, but it is quite a difficult task to stop the mind from thinking for more than a few brief moments. As keeping the mind from thinking is probably not possible, second best is to focus the mind: Apply a relaxation exercise. A relaxation exercise is a form of mental training, a process of a few brief moments up to several minutes where the mind is kept focused on a task that is physically relaxing. This way both goals of the relaxation phase are achieved: The mind is kept from wandering or worrying by focusing on the task at hand, and as a consequence the body in fact gets gradually more relaxed. Examples for relaxation exercises are the “Body Scan”, “Mental Torch”, “Point of Contact” or “Changing Colours of Breath”. There are literally thousands of relaxation exercises, which you can learn from your yoga teacher, the Internet, or a plethora of books. Pick a relaxation exercise and apply it several times before every breath hold. The more often you apply an exercise, the better it will work for you. After a few repetitions it feels like pressing a “relaxation button” with almost instant effect. 18

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 03 Example Relaxation Technique: “Body Scan” “Lay down on your back, hands apart, palms facing up, legs apart. Close your eyes. Imagine yourself in complete darkness. Then you find that little light and guide it to shine on the big toe of your right foot, it gets warm, heavy and soft, and you allow it to sink down towards the ground. You shine the light onto then next toe and feel how it sinks down to the ground, warm, heavy and soft. You move the light from toe to toe.. etc.” You instruct yourself through every muscle group of your body until reaching the face, especially the neck, eyelids, eyebrows, eyeballs, jaw, lips and tongue. Gently bring your mind back to the exercise when you catch it wandering or worrying. Final instruction: Feel the whole body as one. 3.2 One Full Breath Comfortable, focus on relaxation The one full breath is a long and deep inhalation to fill our lungs with as much air as possible. The focus remains on relaxation. It makes not much of a difference if we can access the very last bit of our lung capacity but pay for that with the build up of a lot of tension. Breathe in slowly Filling the lungs completely takes time. You can try this yourself: Inhale as much air as you can in one second. You will notice that only the chest expands and you can only access a part of your lung volume. So, again, take your time. Top freedive athletes allow themselves up to one minute to fill their lungs completely. Of course you do not need to go that far, but go as slow as you comfortably can. You will notice that you will slow down even more after a few repetitions. 19

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 03 There can be only one As the name says, you take only one full breath. Remind yourself that your body’s saturation with Oxygen was already at its maximum even before you started your relaxation phase. Taking more breaths does not mean storing any more Oxygen – there is no space for more tea in a cup that is already full. Two stage full breath Start your one full breath with an exhalation that reaches a little bit deeper than it naturally would. This way it will be easier for you to feel the air flowing deeply into your belly once you start inhaling. Stage one: belly breathing. Focus on your belly, feel how it is expanding softly and steadily. Take your time and keep your total relaxation. When your belly is fully expanded, then you switch to stage two. Stage two: chest breathing. Keep inhaling in a steady flow by expanding your chest. Keep your relaxation also in this phase and make sure that only the muscles on the side by your ribs are active. Become aware of keeping your shoulders and neck soft, while you go on inhaling into your chest until you feel comfortably full. Remember: There is no gain in pushing in the last bit of air into your lungs if this happens at the sacrifice of your relaxation. Tip: While doing your one full breath, try pursing the lips. It feels – and sounds – as if you were inhaling through an invisible straw. For training purposes you can actually use a real straw to lengthen your full inhalation and work towards a steady airflow from the bottom to the top of your lungs. You have finished your one full breath. Note that inhaling is a process that takes muscle activity – but holding the air in is not! You achieve this by shutting your throat, or, to be precise, you are tensing the muscles surrounding the vocal cords. If you are not sure what this means, then try this: Imagine you are lifting a heavy 20

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 03 Two steps, one full breath weight. When mobilizing all your strength you will automatically exhale and then all of a sudden lock your throat with a loud sound similar to “hhhhak!”. That action in your throat will keep the air from flowing out despite the pressure you apply by lifting the heavy weight. After finishing the one full breath, shut your throat the same way to keep the air in your lungs. This allows you to let go of any tension that you built up during inhaling. Now, as you hold your breath, return to your relaxation exercise, check for any tension and enjoy the moments of pure silence! 3.3 Breath hold 21

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 03 While holding your breath in water you will always keep your air in your lungs until surfacing. This is true for every form of freediving. There are a few exceptions to that rule in advanced training, but then a freediver will always announce to the buddy that he or she will exhale. If there is no such announcement, escaping air is considered a sign for a freediver in trouble. Relaxation The first moments of a breath hold are very blissful and quiet - not even the sound of breathing is disturbing the silence. Put an unnoticeable smile on your face and enjoy it! If you have not yet done so, now is a good time to resume your relaxation exercise. Check your body, muscle by muscle – you might detect tension you have built up unnoticed. Let go of it, find your absolute relaxation again and keep smiling at yourself. CO₂ build up Some freedivers say that this first part of their breath hold feels like a wide-open window through which they can see a beautiful landscape. After a while, this window starts to close upon them and this is the moment when we usually would breathe. The question is, why breathing? There are actually two reasons why we breathe. First, it is a habit. We are used and very well trained to breathe. Most likely the first thing that you will notice after holding your breath for a while is a thought in your head which might say something like “hang on, I used to breathe at this moment, I think it’s about time to resume that!” Secondly, you feel the build up of Carbon Dioxide (CO ) in your body. Our breathing 2 is to a great extent regulated by the tendency to maintain a steady level of CO in the 2 blood. So, when we are physically active, for example while jogging, we automatically breathe more to exhale that excess of CO produced by our muscles. CO is the waste 2 2 product of any activity. The more active we are, the more CO we produce, and the 2 more we breathe. To say it clearly: Breathing is largely regulated by the need to exhale excess CO , not by the need to inhale fresh Oxygen! 2 This means, during a breath hold the CO level in our body will rise. The more relaxed 2 we are, the slower it rises – but still it will rise. After some time it will reach a level that is noticeable to us and we get what we would call “the urge to breathe”. Holding your breath is a re-assessment of the sensation of rising CO : For the 2 22

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 03 Total relaxation during a static breath hold (STA) untrained person, rising of CO is an imperative to breathe. For a trained freediver, it 2 is a sensation, or, information. It does not mean that you are already low on Oxygen. Even if you have held your breath before, it is quite unlikely that you have felt or experienced a lack of Oxygen. The urge to exhale CO is usually much more noticeable 2 during a breath hold. In this course you will start to create an awareness of rising CO 2 levels. How to deal with low O will be a topic in the more advanced AIDA Freediving 2 Courses. Contractions At a certain point into your breath hold you might start to feel a first contraction of parts of your breathing muscles. This is your body trying to resume to breathe to exhale the accumulated CO . Again, it does not mean that you are low on Oxygen! 2 Allow the contraction to happen and stay relaxed, so that the muscles can release the tension and become soft again. Tip: Relax into your contractions. You cannot and you should not 23

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 03 try to avoid contractions but rather look at them as your internal timer for your breath hold: Maybe your first contraction will come as such a surprise that you end the breath hold right there. That is perfectly fine because now you can prove to yourself that you are fine, your lips are rosy (which is a sign of normal blood oxygenation) and you feel good. The message to yourself is this: “I feel good with one contraction – I wonder what happens next!” Now make a plan for your next breath hold. How about “first contraction and then count to ten”. So after a nice long relaxation phase you take one full breath and start your second breath hold, very relaxed and with a fantastic view out the window. Then the first contraction comes again, so you start counting, slowly and steadily. At the count of “ten” you lift your head out of the water and resume breathing. The message to yourself is now the following: “I feel good with one contraction plus counting to ten – I wonder what happens next!” So you make a new plan for the third breath hold – maybe you will count to fifteen, or twenty? Choose a number that you are comfortable with and prepare for the next round. Maybe in this round, maybe in the next one you will get your second contraction. Your contractions become your timer: You can plan your breath holds by the number of contractions. Always increase the number a little bit at a time, end the breath hold at the planned number of contractions to prove to yourself that you are fine with that number as well. Before you know it you will count up to very large numbers of contractions – they are your new best friends. Mind game 24

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 03 By this time you have already figured out that holding your breath is less of a physical and more of a mental challenge. Your mind is simply not used to not breathing. Despite better knowledge, your mind will come up with all sorts of reasons and excuses why you cannot go on holding your breath right now. It is maybe because you are not perfectly relaxed, or your one full breath was not actually that full, or today is a bad day in general. Whatever reasons your mind comes up with in order to stop that breath hold right now; convince yourself that you can deal with it despite all your thoughts or opinions about the current situation. The fact that your mind will try to convince you that you need to breathe right now imposes a very interesting question: Who is in charge – your mind or you? Without going too deep into that fundamental philosophical question: You are in charge and it is your decision when to end a breath hold. It is fair to say that this is a game that you play with your mind. When thoughts pop up in your mind, look at them as an unattached observer and let them pass. Just like you are looking at clouds, how they form, change shape and disappear without your involvement. This is the mind game of holding your breath. Tip: Not to think is not easy, so try feeding your mind with positive thoughts. While holding your breath, create your personal happy place. Maybe this is a childhood memory, a fantasy, or even a real place that you have visited recently: Recreate that place in your mind as realistically as possible, count the steps, smell the scents of the flowers, hear the voices of people that might be around. Tip: Use the sounds that are actually there, in the pool or confined water, while you hold your breath. Build these noises into your happy place: A propeller of a boat nearby becomes a beautiful bird that you can see dancing in the air, or the sound of the pool’s water pump becomes a cable car, lifting you up to the top of a mountain. See video here 3.4 recovery breathing 25

AIDA2 MANUAL CHAPTER 03 As we learned earlier, your breath hold does not end when you surface; it ends when you have resumed breathing. Safety concept Recovery breathing is a safety concept. It is the technique how to breathe in order to properly finish a breath hold. What you need now is to inhale fresh Oxygen. Make it a habit to end every breath hold with recovery breathing! And this is why: As you progress and train as a freediver, it may happen that you surface from a dive and have pushed it a bit too far which means that you are actually low on Oxygen. In such a situation, rational thinking does not happen anymore, you will simply do what you trained your body to do – recovery breathing. This is the reason why recovery breathing is an integral component of every dive: You train your body that every breath hold – be it a dive at the surface or to depth – ends with recovery breaths. Once you get into that low-Oxygen situation and your rational thinking comes to a halt, your body will automatically do what you trained it to do: Recovery breathing to restore the gas levels in your body to normal in the shortest possible time! Relaxed passive half exhalation As you always surface with all your air still in your lungs – remember, a freediver never exhales during the dive – the first exhalation is nothing more than opening your airways and letting the air f

[Content truncated for brevity]